the un's top court rules Israel's
decades long occupation of Palestinian
territories is unlawful the
international court of justice says it
must end as rapidly as possible but
what's the impact of this non-binding
ruling and will it change anything on
the ground this is Inside Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm
Muhammad Jim illegal Israeli settlements
have been steadily expanding in
Palestinian territories for years now
the un's top Court says it's time for
Israel to stop reverse course and repair
the damages the international court of
justice has ruled Israel's occupation is
unlawful and is fueling a surge in
violence however the Court's findings
are not legally binding and the Israel
government has ignored previous
decisions so will the icj's advisory
opinion have any practical implications
will it increase pressure on Israel's
allies we'll explore these issues with
our guests in a moment but first this
report by kacha Lopez
hodan please be seated the un's top
court has called on Israel to end its
occupation of Palestinian territories as
rapidly as possible it says Israel's
policies violate international law and
amount to
annexation Israel has an obligation to
put an end to those unlawful acts Israel
also has an obligation to repeal all
legislation and measures that create or
maintain this unlawful
situation most Israeli settlements are
in the occupied West Bank the
international court of justice says
Israel should stop construction
immediately and remove settlers from
Palestinian land it also urges Israel to
pay restitution to Pal
alians all states must now fulfill their
clear obligations no Aid no collusion no
money no weapons no trade nothing with
Israel but the Court's opinion is not
binding and the Israeli government has
ignored previous rulings in a statement
posted on social media prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu says the Jewish
people cannot be occupiers in their own
land many of the the ministers
especially from the extreme very extreme
right H believe that Israel can live
without the world and that anything
which is said about us about conquering
about occupying and
whatever is biased despite International
criticism Israel has for years seiz more
land to expand its illegal settlements
an estimated 780,000 is Israeli settlers
live in the occupied West Bank and their
Palestinian neighbors live under
military rules and regulations that
limit their
freedoms the initial requests asking the
court to review Israel's actions in the
occupied territories was submitted by
the 's general assembly in 2022 well
before the war on Gaza but the findings
are now raising questions about Israel's
9month Onslaught on the Strip despite
the ongoing attacks Israel's strongest
allies the US says the ceasefire deal
with Hamas is making progress I believe
we're inside the 10 yard line and
driving toward the goal line and getting
an agreement that would produce a
ceasefire get the hostages home it's not
the first time a court has condemned
Israel's policies in the occupied
territories now Palestinians are
wondering if the Court's opinion will
carry any weight on the ground Kia Lopez
Alan Al jazer for ins
story all right let's go ahead and bring
in our guests wasam Ahmed is the head of
the Center for Applied international law
at alhak a Palestinian rights
organization he joins us from rala in
the occupied West Bank in the heag Adams
is the legal council for the state of
Palestine and author of the book The
United Nations and the question of
Palestine and in London is Yosi
meckelberg an associate fellow of the
Middle East and North Africa program at
chadam house warm welcome to you all and
thanks so much for joining us today on
Inside Story with Sam let me start with
you today Palestinian officials have
hailed this icj ruling as a watershed
moment from your perspective do you
agree how historic is
this yeah we definitely agree that this
is a significant milestone in the
history of the Palestinian struggle and
specifically through the use of
international law as a tool for the
realization of the right to
self-determination for the Palestinian
people um the international institutions
that have developed uh since World War
II have uh um unfortunately been slow uh
to address the um the modern day
colonization that is taking place in the
Palestinian context but I think uh this
recent decision uh puts in full view uh
with strong authoritative uh uh legal
content that uh Israel's practices
within uh occupied Palestinian territory
um whether they said it or not reflect a
continuation of colonization that needs
to be brought to an
end wasam despite all that this advisory
opinion is a non-binding ruling so in
light of that will it have an impact on
the ground and if so when might it start
having an impact on the
ground well the impact on the ground is
very much dependent on uh third states
and their willingness to take heed of
this advisory opinion and uh and put the
recommendations uh brought forward uh to
action and this requires concrete steps
to be taken uh by Third states by
International organizations to challenge
Israel's cost benefit calculus of this
colonial project I mean historically
colonial projects uh have continued
until that cost benefit analysis changes
and right now unfortunately Israel
continues to enjoy the
impunity that comes with its uh its
unwavering support from its allies and
that uh requires a change within the
international communities dealing with
Israel and changing that cost benefit
calculus Ary uh we know that this isn't
the first time that a court or
International body has condemned
Israel's policies in the occupied
territories from your Vantage Point how
significant is this ruling from the icj
and are you in any way surprised by
it um it's a seismic event uh when one
looks at the history of the icj when one
looks at the history of international
law and the question of Palestine it is
seismic it offers the potential for
great change if followup requisite
followup is undertaken why well as you
uh said in your leadup and as we Sam has
reaffirmed the principal judicial organ
of the United Nations has issued uh an
authoritative legal opinion uh on
Israel's continued presence in the
occupied Palestinian territory which it
has deemed now to be and determined now
to be illegal unlawful now the United
Nations has over many decades indicated
that many of Israel's actions in the
occupied Palestinian territory have been
illegal they have documented that
chapter and verse but what they haven't
done until today or until yesterday was
determine the legality of the regime
itself that gives rise to these other
illegal actions and that means that
everything the Israelis do in the
occupied Palestinian territory because
they're there unlawfully is Tainted with
illegality this has a run-on effect with
not only Israel's legal obligations
under international law they're obliged
to to end the occupation as rapidly as
possible and Bas
Ono's case that meant six months now in
this case the modalities of when the
occupation needs to be ended will be
left to the general assembly uh but we
surmise that that will be listed as 6
months because that will be the starting
point um in addition there are
obligations of Israel to make reparation
not only pecuniary but also material
return of refugees return of property
return of cultural property that has
been stolen you can imagine the extent
of of the damages over 60 years almost
of Israeli foreign military occupation
colonization and annexation of
Palestinian territory that that would
entail um in addition there are third
state obligations now that are triggered
all states on earth have obligations
first not to recognize Israel's
continued presence in the occupied
Palestinian territory nor most
importantly to not Aid or assist in the
maintenance of that illegal act action
and then finally the court has deted
that Israel's uh presence in the
territory is accompanied by a regime of
racial discrimination racial segregation
and apartheid those terms racial
segregation and apart tide that must be
brought to an end forth with by the
International Community one thing I'd
like to mention as well Muhammad you'd
mentioned at the at the leadup that this
is a non-binding opinion I beg to differ
while technically advisory opinions are
on their face non-binding to the extent
that the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations being the CJ makes a
determination authoritative
determination on how to interpret
relevant International legal principles
which are themselves already binding
because they form part of customary
international law those aspects of the
ruling are binding and I can tell you
hand on heart that every key finding of
the of the international court of
justice including those which I've set
out now are binding on Israel and not
just on Israel on the whole of the
International Community you'll see in
the aftermath of of the decision we
heard Israeli Prime Minister MIM
Netanyahu and other members of his
government condemn this decision that of
course is not a surprise that they've
taken that stance but from your Vantage
Point do you believe that any members of
the government are taking a different
stance privately is there any pocket of
concern amongst Israeli government
officials about how much pressure this
might eventually put on
Israel yeah it depends who you talk to
in this government because again it's
not it's not a completely monolithic
government I think despite the strong
response from prime minister Netanyahu
or or foreign minister Israel cats they
understand the severity as was so well
described earlier of of of this
decision yeah whether it's binding or
not it depends how count actually and
organization businesses are going to
react to this and yes there are flows in
in in the ability to enforce enforce
such such decision but people like netan
and some others understand the severity
of of of this and what what imply I
think here in the UK with a new
government which the Prime Minister the
Prime Minister here is is is a is a
lawyer human rights lawyer I expect that
he would take it very seriously I think
the the secretary foreign secretary
David Lamy visited and he talks about
the the the need to end the occupation
on the other hand you have elements with
within the Israeli government definitely
the very far right they will all argue
that whatever the International
Community is doing they're doing because
they they they hate Israel they are
anti-sites so one should not listen to
to such such decision that's that's what
brought all of this and settler violence
for instance to to begin with there is
no recognition as such they don't
recognize many of those from the far
right don't recognize the Israeli law
let alone they don't recognize the
international law but it's exactly
that's is for the International
Community to make discount it's not they
will continue do what they have done for
so many years that end with 160
settlements 700,000 settlers and the
situation that the Discrimination the
violence that we see the confiscation
land would see every day wasam is there
going to be pressure now on Palestinian
leadership to try and utilize this
ruling in a way that makes a difference
for Palestinians what are the
expectations going to be from
Palestinians on the ground
there well again I think the advisory
opinion gives us another tool in the
toolkit um in use for advocacy efforts
by Civil Society um I think definitely
the the Palestinian leadership can
leverage this opinion to enhance
diplomatic engagements um I mean it it
provides a strong Legal Foundation uh to
uh to make the case uh uh within the UN
and various other International fors um
and it is incumbent upon uh all
Palestinians and all those uh struggling
for the rights of the Palestinian people
to make use of this decision and turn it
into tangible action we've seen what
happened with the previous advisory
opinion issued uh 20 years ago uh that
it had an impact in movement through
Civil Society action uh but was not uh
utilized uh to the greatest extent
possible and I think we have to learn uh
from the lessons of the past that simply
having an advisory opinion having even
any judicial ruling alone will not be
enough it has to be converted into Tang
action and this will only come through
concrete pressure that is being exerted
through civil society that will lead to
a shift in the political will of those
countries that are continuing to support
Israel blindly odly I saw you reacting
to what was Sam was saying so I'm going
to give you a chance to jump in but I
also want to ask you about another issue
you know in the past few months we've
seen the US the UK we've seen European
sanctions being imposed on Israeli
settlers and settler groups that support
them does this ruling from the icj mean
that we might see some of these
governments applying sanctions uh to
settlers that they might start applying
sanctions to members of the Israeli
government uh it's it's certainly
possible and in fact it's it would be if
you like required so up until now these
states who've imposed limited sanctions
on individual settlers those are sort of
uh hiding behind fig Leaf really the
settlements as
are actions taken by the occupying power
to acquire territory through the use of
force they they butress if you like
Israel's aggression Israel's annexation
and the illegal occupation that it has
had in the in the occupied Palestinian
territory since 1967 so what that calls
on is the duty of third States including
these states that you'd mentioned to not
recognize any action that Israel takes
in the territory to maintain the illegal
situation being their presence in the
territory what is this mean for
settlements not merely the imposition of
sanctions on individual settlers one or
two here or there but to ensure that
trade relations with these states that
are bilateral between Israel and them
that uh extradition agreements that they
have with Israel if they exist that that
in their bilateral relations with Israel
that they differentiate between Israel
proper and the occupied Palestinian
territory which is not Israel and this
this will require far more action far
more robust action domestically by these
states um uh if they are to abide by
their obligations under uh the The
Advisory opinion and I have every
confidence that this is going to serve
as a tool if you like the opinion uh to
change policy bilateral policy of third
States in their relations with Israel uh
touches on the status of Jerusalem
touches on the status of the occupied
Palestinian territory and and other
relations that they have cultural
relations economic relations and so on
y see uh let me get your take on this um
do you think we're going to start seeing
sanctions being applied to Israeli
ministers or institutions supporting the
settlement Enterprise and and do you
think that allies of Israel could find
themselves at risk of perhaps future
prosecution if they support Enterprises
that are linked to Illegal
settlements it's a definitely a
possibility there is an accumulation of
events here it's not only this although
this this case started before the war in
in in Gaza considering what is happened
in the last nine months it's add today
there is an accumulative criticism of
the way Israel treats the Palestinians
let let's remind ourselves that this
opinion or the advisory opinion is not
only about what's happening in the in in
the West Bank but also in Gaza before
the war and and and in this sense that
Gaza was occupied even before the war
and the fact that Israel withdrew from
Gaza in 2005 but control the borders the
air space the the the sea borders
mounted to to occupation so this is kind
of an ongoing and I think again not much
surprised Us in in in what we heard
yesterday but it put it in in a legal
language which every country would have
to take very seriously especially
countries that fashion themselves in
supporting human rights and and and want
to advance a a international law and
this is this is a test for every country
how to go about it it's different at the
end of the day we will have to look also
the political side no one expect all the
settlements to to be removed and
definitely not immediately but it should
push Israel and its allies to rethink
and how they go about when the is far in
Gaza when we look at the day after also
the future of the conflict in which
everyone has the same right as the
occupation comes to an end the right of
Palestinians for self determination the
the reparation and the rest of
ity um you spoke earlier if yeah well go
ahead I was gonna I was gonna get you
with a followup but go ahead go ahead
yeah um just with respect to what Yosi
just mentioned he might he might have
said this in passing that he said no one
expect expects that the settlers will
will be evacuated or all of the settle
settlers will be evacuated or something
to that effect I hope I uh got that
correctly um actually with respect
you're wrong Yosi uh the international
court of justice has indicated just
yesterday that every settler in the
occupied Palestinian territory has to be
removed by Israel from the occupied
Palestinian territory as rapidly as
possible now the questions of the
modalities of when that takes place are
up to the general assembly and as I said
earlier based on the Cho's precedent
you're looking at possibly 6 months a
determination by the general assembly
that this has to happen within 6 months
it may or may not do but the point is it
won't be up and this is the most
important point I think that we take
away from all of this uh that is
happened in the ha yesterday it it won't
be contingent none of this the end of
the occupation will no longer be
contingent on
negotiation the occupation itself is
unlawful it is an internationally wrong
act and under the law of State
responsibility as affirmed by the
principal judicial organ of the UN
Israel is under an obligation to end
that internationally wrongful act
unilaterally unconditionally that is not
subject to negotiation so when it comes
to third States for instance and the
pressure that they may be brought
bringing to bear on the parties to the
conflict to negotiate the end of the
occupation those days are long gone and
and and the icj has made it so just
yesterday wasam I do have a question for
you but yes Yosi I'm going to let you go
ahead and and respond to what AR was
saying I I I agree with you that's you
know the settlements project and
settlers it's illegal but we are in
situation that we are also to look at it
in a realistic way it's not going to
happen in six months whether whether we
like it or not we definitely can look
back said that you know we wish that the
settlement project would have never
started and and that end the result the
situation that we are in but we know
that in all all negotiation between the
Israelis and the Palestinians there is
an agreement that some settlements will
stay and some settlements will go and
there will be swap of land so I think
what what I think the court decided
yesterday or or pined yesterday it sets
a very important Benchmark about the
illegality of the settlements and the
presence of the settlers how is going to
translate into Political reality which
will respect and it should respect this
decision I think this has to be soon it
it's bound to be so and take place so
negotiation Witham um we've spoken
already in this conversation about the
potential role that the UN might play
going forward the court ordered the UN
General Assembly and the UN Security
Council to take whatever action
necessary to end the legal occupation at
the UN what do you expect to happen what
are your expectations going
forward well I mean the the UN is the
composition of individual states uh and
so uh um we expect those states that
supported the advisory opinion in the
first place uh to take a lead in uh
pushing it forward through the general
assembly but also uh push uh for
Security Council action but at the same
time not to be reliant on these un
organs themselves to take action because
each individual state has its own
obligations uh to address its
relationships with Israel the conduct of
uh its businesses in their
engagement with with Israel especially
in occupied territory involvement of the
settlement Enterprise because each
individual state has a role to play in
changing this cost benefit calculus of
Israel's profitable settlement
Enterprise and it is this that needs to
be uh challenged and every state needs
to reassess its relationships and how it
can challenge and change that cost
benefit calculus because until now
Israel has developed the what I call a
best business practice of colonialism
which it has continued to exploit
Palestinian land natural resources in
addition to exploiting the Palestinian
people themselves whether through Labor
or using them as laborat for the
development of technology that is then
exported abroad all of this systemic uh
uh issue needs to be addressed in a
holistic manner but each individual
state has role to play in addressing it
um in its constituent
Parts AR why do you think it took so
long for the question of Israel's
legitimacy over the occupied territories
to be addressed in this particular way
it has to do with the historical record
of the treatment of the occupied
Palestinian territory by the United
Nations since
1967 um in that year uh there were
differences of opinion between different
blocks of States as to who was to blame
for the the the onset of hostilities and
their for the the resulting occupation
the Arab states the Eastern block said
that this was an aggression by Israel
the western states said the opposite and
there isn't a clear record within the UN
system on who was to blame for 1967
despite what the record has since
revealed um and so it took a while for
the International Community through the
UN system to determine that Israel's
presence in the occupied territory was
in and of itself unlawful you have some
indications from the general assembly in
the late 1970 s and early 1980s very
Express references in general assembly
resolutions that Israel's occupation is
unlawful um and as well as in the
economic and social Council in the 1990s
but those references to Israel's illegal
occupation um drop off after Oslo and I
have not been able to determine why I
surmise that it's because of the promise
that Oslo held out to the International
Community uh on on the end of the
occupation and we now know that that was
a false promise but all this to say it
took a while and a lot of work um to to
get the court uh to to arrive at this
conclusion but it fundamentally was
determined by the facts on the ground
all of which are established in the UN
record overwhelmingly clear annexation
of occupied Palestinian territory and
the desire to to to frustrate the right
of the Palestinian people to
self-determination while imposing a
regime of racial segregation and
apartheid on them that renders the
occupation existentially unlawful you
see we only have about a minute and a
half left but I I just want to ask you
um you know Israel immediately well
government officials in Israel
immediately rejected this conclusion
from the icj um do you think that the
opinions that have been stated by
Netanyahu and and other ministers and
members of his government reflect what
public opinion is in
Israel no and we and we know that
Israelis would like to see a different
government since since October 7 we we
saw that opinion polls after
isra want to see the end of n primip but
it does prip but it doesn't mean that
the Israeli Society is going to the left
or becoming more pnic as a result of it
and I think
possibly at this advisory opinion came
in different timing and not during war
and
not a society that suffers from from
trauma maybe there will been more
openness towards that right now I'm
afraid that most Israel will see it
again is an act against Israel in sense
to going through what Israel needs to go
in Israel Society so H soering think
what is the occupation done to Israel to
its democracy to its morality to its
relations with the with the Palestinians
and and and and the region but I I'm
afraid on this issue it's not going to
happen right now all right well we have
run out of time so we're going to have
to leave the conversation there today
thanks so much to Our Guest wasam Ahmed
and Yosi meckelberg and thanks so much
for watching you can see the program
again anytime by visiting our website
lg.com and for further discussion go to
our Facebook page that's facebook.com AJ
insidestory you can also join the
conversation on X our handle is at AJ
inside story from me Muhammad Jim and
the whole team here bye for now
[Music]
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from Al jazer